(DOCSP-16273): Backend Compaction / Client Maximum Offline Time (#1427)
mongodb/docs-realm: source/sync/optimize-sync-atlas-usage.txt

client sync states, and can also use that awareness to optimize
compaction. For instance, when no client has synced a CREATE operation
(and any subsequent UPDATE operations) that is
later overwritten by a DELETE operation, compaction can even
remove the "trailing deletes" seen in the last example.

Compaction runs regularly on all synced clusters as part of {+sync+}.

.. _client-maximum-offline-time:

Client Maximum Offline Time
---------------------------

The **client maximum offline time** controls how much change history
your {+backend+} backend stores in Atlas. This indirectly controls how
long a client can remain offline between synchronization sessions with
the {+backend+} backend. Clients that do not synchronize with the
backend for more than the specified number of days must perform a
:ref:`client reset <client-resets>` the next time they connect with the
backend.

The lower the client maximum offline time, the less space {+sync+} uses
to store that history in your synced Atlas clusters.

Key Concepts
~~~~~~~~~~~~

In order for synchronization to converge at the same end state
as the backend and all other clients, a synchronization client requires

> the full history of changes beginning immediately after the client's last

Author: I wouldn't worry about this since this section is scoped under the client maximum offline time, not compaction. We'll see if we need to reword this depending on how we frame CMOT.

synchronization session. When a client does not check in for a long
period of time, the end of history stored on that client can predate

> the beginning of the history of changes stored in the backend. When the

Reviewer: as discussed on our call earlier these last two sentences are not accurate. Prior to this max offline feature, it was possible for a client to be offline for an unbounded duration of time and still catch up to history assuming sync was not terminated and re-enabled while they were offline

.. _optimize-sync-atlas-usage:

=========================
Optimize Sync Atlas Usage
=========================

.. default-domain:: mongodb

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

{+sync+} uses space in your app's synced Atlas cluster to store utility
data for sync, including a history of changes to each {+realm+}.
{+service+} minimizes that space usage via backend
compaction, which runs automatically. You can optimize further by
specifying a client maximum offline time, which enables advanced backend
compaction.

History
-------

The {+service-short+} backend keeps a history of :ref:`changes to
underlying data <changesets>` for each {+realm+}, similar to the
:manual:`MongoDB oplog </core/replica-set-oplog/>`. {+service-short+}
uses this history to synchronize data between the backend and clients.
{+service-short+} stores history in your synced Atlas cluster.

.. _backend-compaction:

Backend Compaction
------------------

**Backend compaction** is a maintenance process that automatically

> runs for all {+app+}s. During backend compaction, {+service-short+}

Reviewer 2: Sentence might be a bit confusing "Realm runs through a realm's history"

Maybe "The backend runs through..."?

> runs through a {+realm+}'s history. Compaction

Author: Already reworded this a little thanks to Andrew's suggestions, but I'm stealing the "the process" phrasing and "newer changes" change from here -- definite improvements. Thanks!

> runs through a {+realm+}'s history. Compaction

Author: Already reworded this a little thanks to Andrew's suggestions, but I'm stealing the "the process" phrasing and "newer changes" change from here -- definite improvements. Thanks!

removes changes whose effects are later overwritten by other changes.

.. example::

   Consider the following {+realm+} history:

   .. code-block::

      CREATE table1.object1
      UPDATE table1.object1.x = 4
      UPDATE table1.object1.x = 10
      UPDATE table1.object1.x = 42

   The following history would also converge to the same state, but
   without unneeded interim changes:

   .. code-block::

      CREATE table1.object1
      UPDATE table1.object1.x = 42

Compaction removes unnecessary steps from history to reduce space
usage in your Atlas cluster. Additionally, compaction reduces the time
and data usage of sync. Clients must download fewer historical steps to
converge on the same result.

> Compaction removes any instruction that is later

Reviewer 3: This line seems redundant - we say basically the same thing in the opening paragraph, and it's also illustrated in the example and then almost the same thing is stated in the paragraph above.

I do think this is clearer than the final line of this section's intro paragraph, so I would probably replace "Compaction removes changes whose effects are later overwritten..." with "Compaction removes any instruction that is later overwritten by a newer instruction." - and then probably remove this paragraph, since you say above that compaction is a maintenance process that automatically runs for all Realm apps.

overwritten by a future instruction. Compaction runs regularly on all
synced clusters as part of {+sync+}.

.. _advanced-backend-compaction:

Advanced Backend Compaction
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> **Advanced backend compaction** uses client sync states to optimize

Reviewer 3: I had to read this a couple of times to parse it. I think we can communicate this more concisely and a bit more clearly. What about something like:

> Advanced backend compaction uses client sync states to further optimize a changeset. However, this optimization can prevent convergence for clients that have only seen a subset of history.

subsets of history. As a result, advanced backend compaction only
occurs for history older than the client maximum offline time.

.. example::

   Consider the following {+realm+} history:

   .. code-block::

      CREATE table2.object2
      CREATE table1.object1
      DELETE table2.object2

   Because there is a gap in time between the CREATE and DELETE operations
   for ``table2.object2``, a client could have synchronized the CREATE,
   but not the DELETE. As a result, compaction can remove the CREATE, but
   not the DELETE:

   .. code-block::

      CREATE table1.object1
      DELETE table2.object2

   This guarantees client convergence. If the history didn't include the
   DELETE, clients that synced the CREATE would never
   delete ``table2.object2``, but other clients would never create that
   object in the first place. Instead, all clients get a command to
   delete that object, and any clients who never created ``table2.object2``
   in the first place ignore the DELETE.

   The following history uses advanced backend compaction to converge on
   the same state:

   .. code-block::

      CREATE table1.obj1

>    Because ``object2`` was deleted, it has no impact on the current state

Reviewer 3: I think I'm missing something in this example. This CREATE is for object 1 on table 1, but object 2 was on table 2. So I'm not sure how object 2 being deleted relates to table 1/object 1.

(Also, here we're saying `table1.obj1` but above we said `table1.object1` - is this meant to be a new example? or should this example be instead `table1.object1`?)

Author: Reworded this to make this clearer. You are supposed to compare example 1) (no compaction) to example 2) (compaction) to example 3) (advanced compaction). If you think this is still unclear, happy to take restructuring/rewording suggestions.

   of the {+realm+}. As a result, advanced backend compaction can
   completely remove it from history.

> Advanced backend compaction only runs on clusters that specify a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Advanced backend compaction only runs on realm apps that specify a
```

client maximum offline time.

.. _client-maximum-offline-time:

Client Maximum Offline Time
---------------------------

The **client maximum offline time** controls the age limit of history
optimized with :ref:`advanced backend compaction <advanced-backend-compaction>`.
This indirectly changes how long a client can remain offline between
synchronization sessions with the backend. Clients that do not
synchronize for more than the specified number of days

> may experience a :ref:`client reset <client-resets>` the next time they

Reviewer 3: Do we need to go into more detail about why it's "may" experience a client reset?

connect with the backend.

> The lower the client maximum offline time, the sooner compaction can

Reviewer 3: Ahh, this paragraph is what I was missing before about why we'd want to use this. Nice!

apply advanced backend compaction to history. The resulting optimizations
usually result in less storage usage in the synced Atlas cluster.

Key Concepts
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sync should always converge at the same end state on all clients. In
order to converge during a sync, clients require the full history of
changes beginning immediately after their last sync. When a client does
not sync for a long period of time, advanced backend compaction can
alter the history in ways that prevent the client from converging. Since
synchronization relies on all clients converging on a common result,

> such a client cannot synchronize.

Reviewer 4: can you rephrase this line? "such a client" seems overly vague to me. took me a couple of readings of the paragraph to understand what you meant here

Reviewer 4: also could be good to talk about the implications of this here. as i understand it from reading further below, the implication is that there must be a client reset. 

might be better to put the example running lines 152-181 *after* the text running lines 181-199. this way the concept is explained fully before the example

   ``table2.object2``:

   .. code-block::

      CREATE table2.object2
      CREATE table1.object1
      DELETE table2.object2

   When this history becomes older than the client maximum offline time,
   advanced backend compaction optimizes the backend history into the
   following:

   .. code-block::

      CREATE table1.obj1

   However, a client contains this subset of history, containing only
   the CREATE operation for ``table2.object2``:

   .. code-block::

      CREATE table2.object2
      CREATE table1.object1

   Since compaction pruned the DELETE operation for ``table2.object2``, the
   client will never delete that object. The client cannot converge to the same
   state as the backend and all other clients.

As a result, the client must complete a client reset before it can
resume synchronization. In a client reset scenario, the client deletes
the client-local copy of a {+realm+} and downloads the current state of
that {+realm+} from the backend. Synchronization then resumes using the
new copy of the {+realm+}.

The client maximum offline time controls how long your backend waits
before applying advanced backend compaction. After the specified number

> of days without syncing, clients experience a client reset the next time

Reviewer 3: Above we say "may" experience a client reset, but here we seem to indicate that clients will definitely experience a client reset. Makes me wonder which is accurate.

they connect with the backend.

> Applications that do not specify the client maximum offline time never

Reviewer 3: I think we can drop some unnecessary words here to shorten some of these sentences and improve readability. I fiddled with this and got to something like this:

> Applications that do not specify the client maximum offline time never apply advanced backend compaction. This means that clients can connect after any period of time offline -- weeks, months, or even years -- and synchronize changes. As time passes, frequently-edited realms may reflect many changes. With a large changeset, synchronization requires more time and data usage.

apply advanced backend compaction to any history. This means that clients
can connect after any period of time offline -- weeks, months, or even years
-- and synchronize changes from the backend. After a long period of time,
there may be a large number of changes for {+realm+}s with frequent
edits, so synchronization could take a large amount of time and data.

Set the Client Maximum Offline Time
-----------------------------------

.. tabs-realm-admin-interfaces::

   .. tab::
      :tabid: ui
      
      1. Select the :guilabel:`Sync` menu in the sidebar.

      2. Click the :guilabel:`Client Maximum Offline Time (Optional)` dropdown
         in the "Configuration" tab.

         .. figure:: /images/client-maximum-offline-time.png
           :width: 750px
           :alt: The client maximum offline time configuration in a disabled state.

      3. Click the :guilabel:`Enable Max Offline Time` toggle.

>       4. Enter a number greater than or equal to 1 specifying a number of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      4. Enter a number greater than or equal to 1 specify a number of
```

Author: Not sure if this suggestion is proper english -- reworded this significantly instead:

```
         Specify a number of days for your application's client maximum
         offline time. The default value is 30 days. The minimum value is
         1.
```

         days for your application's client maximum offline time. The default

>          value is 30 days.

Reviewer 3: I think we're missing a step - it looks like users have to press the `Update Offline Time` button to accept/confirm the changes.

   
   .. tab::

>       :tabid: cli

Reviewer 3: I'm wondering this because we recently created several sets of Realm CLI instructions for the "Manage Realm Apps" section - should we add as prerequisites for this step having a copy of `realm-cli` and an API key, ala: [Deploy Changes with Realm CLI Prerequisites](https://docs.mongodb.com/realm/manage-apps/deploy/manual/deploy-cli/#prerequisites)?

Also, this made me wonder if the [Admin API/Sync API](https://docs.mongodb.com/realm/admin/api/v3/#sync-apis) needs to be updated - it looks like it only reflects the `service_id` and `partition_fields`, but I wonder if you've tried this endpoint to see if the max client offline time is reflected in the GET response?

(Unrelated to this PR, I've noticed that where we do specify CLI prerequisites, they're worded inconsistently - we should probably just make them an include so we're using the same prerequisites everywhere we provide CLI & API instructions. Maybe a maintenance task?)

Author: Couldn't agree more on the prerequisites bit here -- I'm planning a PD for refactoring all of these UI/CLI commands to use common parts next quarter. Stay tuned :) 

And adding this to the Admin API, which does include this field.

>       1. Pull a local copy of the latest version of your app with the

Reviewer 3: Might be good to link to link to the realm-cli pull page here so users can easily see any additional options they might want to specify, and link to push below for the same reason.
